=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

nbdkit-vddk-plugin - VMware VDDK plugin for nbdkit

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit .../plugins/nbdkit-vddk-plugin.so file=FILENAME

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-vddk-plugin> is a L<nbdkit(1)> plugin that serves files from
VMware VMDK and other sources by using VMware's proprietary VDDK
library.

Currently it can only serve local VMDK files.  The required
C<file=FILENAME> parameter should point to a VMDK file.  It would be
relatively simple to extend this plugin to access ESX servers or
Virtual Center.

The plugin can serve read-only (if the I<-r> option is used) or
read/write.

=head1 LIBRARY LOCATION

If the VDDK library (C<libvixDiskLib.so>) is located on a non-standard
path, you may need to set C<LD_LIBRARY_PATH> or modify
C</etc/ld.so.conf> before this plugin will work.

The VDDK library may depend on C<libexpat.so.0> which you may have to
install yourself.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<config=FILENAME>

This optional parameter lets you specify the name of the VDDK
configuration file.

=item B<file=FILENAME>

Set the name of the VMDK file to serve.  This parameter is required.

=item B<libdir=PATHNAME>

This sets the path of the VMware VDDK library.  It must be an
absolute path.

If the parameter is not given, then a hard-coded path determined at
compile time is used.

=back

=head1 DEBUGGING VDDK

Run nbdkit like this to see all debugging messages:

 nbdkit -f -v .../plugins/nbdkit-vddk-plugin.so file=FILENAME

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<vddk.c> in the nbdkit source tree,
L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<https://www.vmware.com/support/developer/vddk/>

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2013 Red Hat Inc.

=head1 LICENSE

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

=over 4

=item *

Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

=item *

Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

=item *

Neither the name of Red Hat nor the names of its contributors may be
used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
specific prior written permission.

=back

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY RED HAT AND CONTRIBUTORS ''AS IS'' AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL RED HAT OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGE.
