=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

nbdkit-streaming-plugin - nbdkit streaming plugin

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit streaming pipe=FILENAME [size=SIZE]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-streaming-plugin> is a plugin for L<nbdkit(1)> that can turn
certain kinds of input into a stream.

If the NBD client opens the NBD port, and writes from the start to the
end of the disk without seeking backwards, then this plugin will turn
the resulting disk image into a stream of data which is written to the
named C<pipe> parameter.

Typical usage is with qemu tools.  For example:

 qemu-img convert input -O raw output

does I<not> work if C<output> is a pipe.  However this does:

 nbdkit -U /tmp/nbd.sock streaming pipe=output --run '
   qemu-img convert -n input -O raw $nbd
 '

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<pipe=FILENAME>

Write to the named pipe or socket.  If the pipe or socket does not
exist, then it is created (as a named FIFO), otherwise the existing
pipe or socket is opened and used.

This parameter is required.

=item B<size=SIZE>

Specify the virtual size of the stream.

This parameter is optional.  If not specified, then the virtual disk
appears to the client to be very large (effectively infinite).
Whether you need to specify this parameter depends on the client.
Some clients don't check the size and just write/stream, others do
checks or calculations based on the apparent size.

=back

=head1 TO DO

This plugin would be much nicer if it supported the concept of a
"window" of data, allowing limited reverse seeks and reads.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2014 Red Hat Inc.

=head1 LICENSE

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

=over 4

=item *

Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

=item *

Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

=item *

Neither the name of Red Hat nor the names of its contributors may be
used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
specific prior written permission.

=back

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY RED HAT AND CONTRIBUTORS ''AS IS'' AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL RED HAT OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGE.
