=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

nbdkit-xz-plugin - nbdkit xz plugin

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit .../plugins/nbdkit-xz-plugin.so file=FILENAME.xz

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-xz-plugin> is file serving plugin for L<nbdkit(1)>.

It serves the named C<FILENAME.xz> over NBD, uncompressing it on the
fly.  The plugin only supports read-only connections.

=head2 GETTING BEST RANDOM ACCESS PERFORMANCE FROM XZ

L<xz(1)> files are split into streams and blocks.  Most xz files
contain only one stream which contains one or more blocks.  You can
find out how many streams and blocks are in an xz file by doing:

 $ xz --list winxp.img.xz
 Strms  Blocks   Compressed Uncompressed  Ratio  Check   Filename
     1       1  2,100.0 MiB  6,144.0 MiB  0.342  CRC64   winxp.img.xz
 =============

xz files are seekable on block boundaries only.  Seeking is done by
seeking directly to the lower block boundary, then (slowly)
uncompressing data until the precise byte is reached.

B<To get best random access performance, you must prepare your xz
files with many small blocks.>

To do this, use the I<--block-size> option with a small-ish block
size.  For example the same image as above compressed with a 16 MB
block size:

 $ xz --best --block-size=16777216 winxp.img
 $ xz --list winxp.img.xz
 Strms  Blocks   Compressed Uncompressed  Ratio  Check   Filename
     1     384  2,120.1 MiB  6,144.0 MiB  0.345  CRC64   winxp.img.xz

This file can be accessed randomly, and at most 16 MB of compressed
data will have to be uncompressed to seek to any byte.

Note as you would expect, xz cannot compress quite as efficiently when
using a small block size.  The space penalty in the above example is
S<E<lt> 1%> of the compressed file size.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<file=FILENAME.xz>

Serve the file named C<FILENAME.xz>.

This parameter is required.

=item B<maxblock=SIZE>

The maximum block size that the plugin will read.  The plugin will
refuse to read xz files that contain any block larger than this size.

The plugin may allocate up to this many bytes of memory.  See the
discussion above about creating xz files with small block sizes in
order to reduce memory usage and increase performance.

This parameter is optional.  If not specified it defaults to 512M.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<xz(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2013 Red Hat Inc.

=head1 LICENSE

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

=over 4

=item *

Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

=item *

Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

=item *

Neither the name of Red Hat nor the names of its contributors may be
used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
specific prior written permission.

=back

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY RED HAT AND CONTRIBUTORS ''AS IS'' AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL RED HAT OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGE.
