=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

nbdkit-python-plugin - nbdkit python plugin

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit python script=/path/to/plugin.py [arguments...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-python-plugin> is an embedded Python interpreter for
L<nbdkit(1)>, allowing you to write nbdkit plugins in Python.

Broadly speaking, Python nbdkit plugins work like C ones, so you should
read L<nbdkit-plugin(3)> first.

=head2 USING A PYTHON NBDKIT PLUGIN

Assuming you have a Python script which is an nbdkit plugin, you run it
like this:

 nbdkit python script=/path/to/plugin.py

You may have to add further C<key=value> arguments to the command
line.  Read the Python script to see if it requires any.  C<script=...>
I<must> come first on the command line.

=head1 WRITING A PYTHON NBDKIT PLUGIN

There is an example Python nbdkit plugin called C<example.py> which
ships with the nbdkit source.

To write a Python nbdkit plugin, you create a Python file which
contains at least the following required functions (in the top level
C<__main__> module):

 def open(readonly):
   # see below
 def get_size(h):
   # see below
 def pread(h, count, offset):
   # see below

Note that the subroutines must have those literal names (like C<open>),
because the C part looks up and calls those functions directly.  You
may want to include documentation and globals (eg. for storing global
state).  Any other top level statements are run when the script is
loaded, just like ordinary Python.

The file does not need to include a C<#!> (hash-bang) at the top, and
does not need to be executable.  In fact it's a good idea not to do
that, because running the plugin directly as a Python script won't
work.

=head2 EXCEPTIONS

Python callbacks should throw exceptions to indicate errors.

=head2 PYTHON CALLBACKS

This just documents the arguments to the callbacks in Python, and any
way that they differ from the C callbacks.  In all other respects they
work the same way as the C callbacks, so you should go and read
nbdkit-plugin(3).

=over 4

=item C<config>

(Optional)

 def config(key, value):
   # no return value

=item C<config_complete>

(Optional)

There are no arguments or return value.

=item C<open>

(Required)

 def open(readonly):
   # return handle

You can return any non-NULL Python value as the handle.  It is passed
back in subsequent calls.

=item C<close>

(Optional)

 def close(h):
   # no return value

After C<close> returns, the reference count of the handle is
decremented in the C part, which usually means that the handle and its
contents will be garbage collected.

=item C<get_size>

(Required)

 def get_size(h):
   # return the size of the disk

=item C<can_write>

(Optional)

 def can_write(h):
   # return a boolean

=item C<can_flush>

(Optional)

 def can_flush(h):
   # return a boolean

=item C<is_rotational>

(Optional)

 def is_rotational(h):
   # return a boolean

=item C<can_trim>

(Optional)

 def can_trim(h):
   # return a boolean

=item C<pread>

(Required)

 def pread(h, count, offset):
   # construct a bytearray of length count bytes and return it

The body of your C<pread> function should construct a buffer of length
(at least) C<count> bytes.  You should read C<count> bytes from the
disk starting at C<offset>.

NBD only supports whole reads, so your function should try to read
the whole region (perhaps requiring a loop).  If the read fails or
is partial, your function should throw an exception.

=item C<pwrite>

(Optional)

 def pwrite(h, buf, offset):
   length = len (buf)
   # no return value

The body of your C<pwrite> function should write the C<buf> string to
the disk.  You should write C<count> bytes to the disk starting at
C<offset>.

NBD only supports whole writes, so your function should try to
write the whole region (perhaps requiring a loop).  If the write
fails or is partial, your function should throw an exception.

=item C<flush>

(Optional)

 def flush(h):
   # no return value

The body of your C<flush> function should do a L<sync(2)> or
L<fdatasync(2)> or equivalent on the backing store.

=item C<trim>

(Optional)

 def trim(h, count, offset):
   # no return value

The body of your C<trim> function should "punch a hole" in the
backing store.

=back

=head2 MISSING CALLBACKS

=over 4

=item Missing: C<load> and C<unload>

These are not needed because you can just use ordinary Python
constructs.

=item Missing: C<name>, C<version>, C<longname>, C<description>, C<config_help>

These are not yet supported.

=back

=head2 THREADS

The thread model for Python callbacks currently cannot be set from
Python.  It is hard-coded in the C part to
C<NBDKIT_THREAD_MODEL_SERIALIZE_ALL_REQUESTS>.  This may change or be
settable in future.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<python(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2013-2014 Red Hat Inc.

=head1 LICENSE

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

=over 4

=item *

Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

=item *

Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

=item *

Neither the name of Red Hat nor the names of its contributors may be
used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
specific prior written permission.

=back

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY RED HAT AND CONTRIBUTORS ''AS IS'' AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL RED HAT OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGE.
