=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

nbdkit-libvirt-plugin - nbdkit libvirt plugin using virDomainBlockPeek

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit .../plugins/nbdkit-libvirt-plugin.so
   [connect=URI] domain=DOMAIN disk=DISK

=head1 EXAMPLE

 nbdkit .../plugins/nbdkit-libvirt-plugin.so domain=MyGuest disk=sda
 guestfish -a nbd://localhost

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-libvirt-plugin> is an L<nbdkit(1)> plugin that lets you
access libvirt guest disks readonly.  It is implemented using the
libvirt C<virDomainBlockPeek> API.  It can also be used over remote
libvirt connections.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<connect=URI>

This optional parameter specifies the libvirt connection URI.

=item B<domain=DOMAIN>

This required parameter specifies the libvirt domain name
(guest name).

=item B<disk=DISK>

This required parameter specifies the guest's disk that we want to
read.

You can either give the path to the backing device (C</path/to/disk>)
or the target name (eg. C<sda>).

In either case use C<virsh dumpxml DOMAIN> to list possible disks.
Look for S<C<E<lt>source dev=...E<gt>>> or
S<C<E<lt>source file=...E<gt>>> or
S<C<E<lt>target dev=...E<gt>>> in the XML.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<http://libvirt.org>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2013 Red Hat Inc.

=head1 LICENSE

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

=over 4

=item *

Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

=item *

Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

=item *

Neither the name of Red Hat nor the names of its contributors may be
used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
specific prior written permission.

=back

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY RED HAT AND CONTRIBUTORS ''AS IS'' AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL RED HAT OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGE.
